The actual order form follows the descriptions of media contents

Please send suggestions for improvements to gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu or the postal
address at the end of the order form.  Thank You.

Most of this file is excerpted from the January 1994 GNU's Bulletin.

---------------------------------------------------------------------


FSF Order Form with Descriptions			January, 1994

Free Software Foundation, Inc.		      Telephone: +1-617-876-3296
675 Massachusetts Avenue		      FAX: +1-617-492-9057
Cambridge, MA	02139-3309		      FAX (in Japan):
USA						  0031-13-2473 (KDD)
Electronic mail: `gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu'		  0066-3382-0158 (IDC)


Contents
--------

	Donations Translate Into Free Software
	Cygnus Matches Donations!
	GNU Documentation
	GNU Software Available Now
	   Contents of the Emacs Tape
	   Contents of the Languages Tape
	   Contents of the Utilities Tape
	   Contents of the Scheme Tape
	   Contents of the X11 Tapes
	   Berkeley Networking 2 Tape
	   VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes
	Source Code CD-ROM
	Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
	Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service
	The Deluxe Distribution
	MS-DOS Distribution
	   Contents of the Demacs diskettes
	   Contents of the DJGPP diskettes
	   Contents of the Selected Utilities diskettes
	   Contents of the Windows diskette
	FSF T-shirt
	Free Software Foundation Order Form



Donations Translate Into Free Software
**************************************

If you appreciate Emacs, GNU CC, Ghostscript, and other free software, you
may wish to help us make sure there is more in the future-remember,
*donations translate into more free software!*

Your donation to us is tax-deductible in the United States.  We gladly accept
*all* currencies, although the U.S. dollar is the most convenient.

If your employer has a matching gifts program for charitable donations,
please arrange to have your donation matched by your employer (or in some
cases by Cygnus Support, see "Cygnus Matched Donations!").  If you do not
know, please ask your personnel department.  Also try and get the FSF listed
on the any list of organizations for the matching gifts program.

	$500	 $250	  $100	   $50	   other $________

	Other currency:________

Circle the amount you are donating, cut out this form, and send it with your
donation to:

	Free Software Foundation
	675 Massachusetts Avenue
	Cambridge, MA	02139-3309
	USA

You can also charge a donation to either Visa, Mastercard, JCB, Diner's Club,
or Carte Blanche.  Charges may also be emailed to `gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu' or
faxed to +1-617-492-9057; in Japan fax to: 0031-13-2473 (KDD) or
0066-3382-0158 (IDC)

     Card type: __________________  Expiration Date: _____________

     Account Number: _____________________________________________

     Your Signature: _____________________________________________



Cygnus Matches Donations!
*************************

To encourage cash donations to the Free Software Foundation, Cygnus Support
will continue to contribute corporate funds to FSF to accompany gifts by its
employees, and by its customers and their employees.

Donations payable to the Free Software Foundation should be sent by eligible
persons to Cygnus Support, which will add its gifts and forward the total to
the FSF each quarter.  The FSF will provide the contributor with a receipt to
recognize the contribution (which is tax-deductible on U.S.  tax returns).
For more information, please contact Cygnus at `info@cygnus.com.'



GNU Documentation
*****************

GNU is dedicated to having quality, easy-to-use on-line and printed
documentation.	GNU manuals are intended to explain the underlying concepts,
describe how to use all the features of each program, and give examples of
command use.  GNU manuals are distributed as Texinfo source files, which
yield both typeset hardcopy and on-line hypertext-like display via the
menu-driven Info system.  These manuals, source for which is provided with
our software, are also available in hardcopy; see the "Free Software
Foundation Order Form."

Several GNU manuals are bound as soft cover books with "lay-flat" bindings.
This allows you to open them so they lie flat on a table without creasing the
binding.  Each book has an inner cloth spine and an outer cardboard cover
that will not break or crease as an ordinary paperback will.  The other GNU
manuals are also bound so they lie flat when opened, using other
technologies.  See the "Free Software Foundation Order Form" for a list of
each.

Edition numbers of the manual and version number of the program listed after
each manual's names were current at the time this Bulletin was published.

The `Emacs Manual' (9th Edition for Version 19) describes editing with GNU
Emacs.	It also explains advanced features, such as outline mode and regular
expression search, how to use special modes for programming in languages like
C++ and TeX, how to use the `tags' utility, how to compile and correct code,
and how to make your own keybindings and other elementary customizations.

The `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual' (Edition 2.1 for Version 19) covers
this programming language in depth, including data types, control structures,
functions, macros, syntax tables, searching and matching, modes, windows,
keymaps, markers, byte compilation, and the operating system interface.

The `Texinfo Manual' (Edition 2.19 for Version 3) explains the markup
language used to generate both the online Info documentation and typeset
hardcopies.  It tells you how to make tables, lists, chapters, nodes,
indexes, cross references, how to use Texinfo mode in GNU Emacs, and how to
catch mistakes.

The `GAWK Manual' (Edition 0.16 for Version 2.16) tells how to use the GNU
implementation of `awk'.  It is written for someone who has never used `awk'
and describes all the features of this powerful string and record
manipulation language.

The `Make Manual' (Edition 0.43 for Version 3.68) describes GNU `make', a
program used to rebuild parts of other programs.  The manual tells how to
write "makefiles", which specify how a program is to be compiled and how its
files depend on each other.  Included are an introductory chapter for novice
users and a section about automatically generated dependencies.

`Debugging with GDB' (Edition 4.09 for Version 4.9) tells how to use the GNU
Debugger, run your program under debugger control, examine and alter data,
modify the flow of control within a program, and use GDB through GNU Emacs.

The `Bison Manual' (December 1993 Edition for Version 1.23) teaches you how
to write context-free grammars for the Bison program that convert into
C-coded parsers.  You need no prior knowledge of parser generators.

The `Flex Manual' (Edition 1.03 for Version 2.3.7) tells you how to write a
lexical scanner definition for the `flex' program to create a C ++ or C-coded
scanner that will recognize the patterns described.  You need no prior
knowledge of scanner generators.

`Using and Porting GNU CC' (June 1993 Edition for Version 2.4) explains how
to run, install and port the GNU C compiler.

The `Termcap Manual' (2nd Edition for Version 1.2), often described as "twice
as much as you ever wanted to know about termcap," details the format of the
termcap database, the definitions of terminal capabilities, and the process
of interrogating a terminal description.  This manual is primarily for
programmers.

The `Emacs Calc Manual' (Edition 2.02 for Version 2.02) includes both a
tutorial and a reference manual for Calc.  It describes how to do ordinary
arithmetic, how to use Calc for algebra, calculus and other forms of
mathematics, and how to extend Calc.

The `C Library Reference Manual' (June 93 Edition for Version 1.07) describes
most of the facilities of the GNU C library, including both what Unix calls
"library functions" and "system calls."	 We are doing limited copier runs of
this manual until it becomes more stable.  It is new, and needs corrections
and improvements.  Please send them to `bug-glibc-manual@prep.ai.mit.edu'.



GNU Software Available Now
**************************

We offer:

   * Source Code CD-ROM (see "Source Code CD-ROM")

   * Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM (see "Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM")

   * MS-DOS Diskettes with some GNU software (see "MS-DOS Distribution")

   * VMS tapes (which include sources and executables) for GNU Emacs and the
     GNU C compiler (see "VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes")

We also offer Unix software source distributions tapes in `tar' format on the
following media:

   * 4mm DAT cartridges

   * 8mm Exabyte cartridges

   * Sun QIC-24 cartridges (readable on some other systems)

   * Hewlett-Packard 16-track cartridges

   * IBM RS/6000 QIC-150 cartridges (readable on some other systems) (the
     RS/6000 Emacs tape has an Emacs binary as well)

   * 1600bpi 9-track reel tape

The contents of the reel and various cartridge tapes for Unix systems are the
same (except for the RS/6000 Emacs tape, which also has executables for
Emacs); only the media are different (see the "Free Software Foundation Order
Form").	 Source code for the manuals is included in Texinfo format.  We
welcome all bug reports sent to the appropriate electronic mailing list (ask
`gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu' for a list).

Some of the files on the tapes may be compressed with `gzip' to make them
fit.  Refer to the top-level `README' file at the beginning of each tape for
instructions on uncompressing them.  `uncompress' and `unpack' *do not work*!

Version numbers listed after program names, in the articles describing the
contents of each media, were current at the time this Bulletin was published.
When you order a distribution tape or diskette, some of the programs might
be newer, and therefore the version number higher.

Key to cross reference:

    BinCD
	  Binaries CD-ROM

    DemcsD
	  Demacs Diskettes

    DjgppD
	  Djgpp Diskettes

    EmcsT
	  Emacs Tape

    LangT
	  Language Tape

    SchmT
	  Scheme Tape

    SrcCD
	  Source CD-ROM

    UtilD
	  Selected Utilities Diskettes

    UtilT
	  Utilities Tape

    VMSCompT
	  VMS Compiler Tape

    VMSEmcsT
	  VMS Emacs Tape

    WdwsD
	  Windows Diskette

    X11OptT
	  X11 Optional Tape

    X11ReqT
	  X11 Required Tape

GNU software currently available:

   * `acm'     (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `acm' is a LAN-oriented, multiplayer aerial combat simulation that runs
     under the X Window System.	 Players engage in air to air combat against
     one another using heat seeking missiles and cannons.  Eventually we hope
     to turn this into a more general purpose flight simulator.

   * Autoconf	  (SrcCD, UtilT)

     Autoconf produces shell scripts which automatically configure source code
     packages.	These scripts adapt the packages to many kinds of Unix-like
     systems without manual user intervention.	Autoconf creates a script for
     a package from a template file which lists the operating system features
     which the package can use, in the form of `m4' macro calls.  Most GNU
     programs now use Autoconf-generated configure scripts.

   * BASH     (SrcCD, UtilT)

     The GNU shell, BASH (Bourne Again SHell), is compatible with the Unix
     `sh' and offers many extensions found in `csh' and `ksh'.	BASH has job
     control, `csh'-style command history, and command-line editing (with
     Emacs and `vi' modes built-in and the ability to rebind keys) via the
     readline library.

   * `bc'     (SrcCD, UtilT)

     `bc' is an interactive algebraic language with arbitrary precision.  GNU
     `bc' follows the POSIX 1003.2 draft standard, with several extensions
     including multi-character variable names, an `else' statement and full
     Boolean expressions.

   * BFD     (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD)

     The Binary File Descriptor library allows a program which operates on
     object files (e.g. `ld' or GDB) to support many different formats in a
     clean way.	 BFD provides a portable interface, so that only BFD needs to
     know the actual details of a particular format.  One consequence of this
     design is that all programs using BFD will support formats such as a.out,
     COFF, ELF & OSF-Rose.  BFD comes with Texinfo documentation.

     Presently BFD is not distributed separately but is included with packages
     that use it, because it is not yet completely stable.

   * Binutils	  (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD)

     The Binutils includes the programs: `ar', `c++filt', `demangle', `gprof',
     `ld', `nlmconv', `nm', `objcopy', `objdump', `ranlib', `size', `strings',
     & `strip'.

     Binutils Version 2 is completely rewritten to use the BFD library.	 The
     GNU linker `ld' emits source-line numbered error messages for
     multiply-defined symbols and undefined references.	 `nlmconv' converts
     object files into Novell NetWare Loadable Modules.	 The `objdump'
     program can disassemble code for a29k, ALPHA, H8/300, H8/500, HP-PA,
     i386, i960, m68k, m88k, MIPS, SH, SPARC, & Z8000 processors, and can
     display other data such as symbols and relocations from any file format
     understood by BFD.

   * Bison     (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD, VMSCompT)

     Bison is an upwardly compatible replacement for the parser generator
     `yacc'.  Sources for the `Bison Manual' and reference card are included.

   * GNU C Library     (LangT, SrcCD)

     The library supports ANSI C-1989 and POSIX 1003.1-1990 and has most of
     the functions specified in POSIX 1003.2 draft 11.2.  It is upward
     compatible with 4.4 BSD and includes many System V functions, plus GNU
     extensions.

     Version 1.07 uses a standard GNU `configure' script.  It runs on Sun-3
     (SunOS 4.1), Sun-4 (SunOS 4.1 & Solaris 2), HP 9000/300 (4.3 BSD), SONY
     News 800 (NewsOS 3 or 4), MIPS DECstation (Ultrix 4), DEC Alpha (OSF/1),
     i386/i486 (System V, SVR4, BSD, SCO 3.2 & SCO ODT 2.0) & Sequent Symmetry
     i386 (Dynix 3).  Texinfo source for the `GNU C Library Reference Manual'
     is included.

   * Calc     (EmcsT, SrcCD)

     Calc (written by Dave Gillespie in Emacs Lisp) is an extensible,
     advanced desk calculator and mathematical tool that runs as part of GNU
     Emacs.  It comes with source for the `Calc Manual' and reference card,
     which serves as a tutorial and reference.	If you wish, you can use Calc
     just as a simple four-function calculator, but it provides additional
     features including choice of algebraic or RPN (stack-based) entry,
     logarithmic functions, trigonometric and financial functions, arbitrary
     precision, complex numbers, vectors, matrices, dates, times, infinities,
     sets, algebraic simplification, differentiation, and integration.	Calc
     also outputs to `gnuplot'.

   * GNU Chess	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU Chess is a program that plays chess with you.	It is written
     entirely in the C language and has been ported to the PC, the Cray-2 &
     numerous other machines.  It has also been ported to other operating
     systems, including Microsoft Windows and MS-DOS, though these versions
     are not supported by the maintainer.  There are both text and X display
     interfaces.

     GNU Chess implements many specialized features including the null move
     heuristic, a hash table with aging, the history heuristic (another form
     of the earlier killer heuristic), caching of static evaluations, and a
     sophisticated database which lets it play the first several moves in the
     game quickly.

     GNU Chess won the Uniform Platform event held in August 1992 in London,
     England.  Nine programs competed, running on identical hardware.

     GNU Chess is primarily supported by Stuart Cracraft on behalf of the FSF.

	     Stuart Cracraft
	     P.O. Box 2841
	     Laguna Hills, CA	92653
	     USA
	     Phone: (714) 770-8532
	     E-mail: `cracraft@ai.mit.edu'

   * CLISP     (EmcsT, SrcCD)

     CLISP is a Common Lisp implementation by Bruno Haible and Michael Stoll.
     It mostly supports the Common Lisp described by `Common LISP: The
     Language (1st edition)'.  CLISP includes an interpreter, a byte-compiler
     and, for some machines, a screen editor.  CLISP needs only 1.5 MB of
     memory and runs on many microcomputers (including the Atari ST, Amiga
     500-2000, most MS-DOS systems & OS/2) & on some Unix workstations
     (Linux, SunOS (SPARC), Sun-386i, HP-UX (HP 9000/800) & others).

   * `cpio'	(UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     `cpio' is an alternative archive program with all the features of SVR4
     `cpio', including support for the final POSIX 1003.1 `ustar' standard.
     `mt' a program to position magnetic tapes is included with `cpio'.

   * CVS     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     CVS, the Concurrent Version System, manages software revision and release
     control in a multi-developer, multi-directory, multi-group environment.
     It works best in conjunction with RCS versions 4 and above, but will
     parse older RCS formats with the loss of CVS's fancier features.  See
     Berliner, Brian, "CVS-II: Parallelizing Software Development,"
     `Proceedings of the Winter 1990 USENIX Association Conference'.

   * `dc'     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `dc' is an RPN calculator.	 GNU `bc' does not require a separate `dc'
     program to run.  This version of `dc' will eventually be merged with GNU
     `bc'.

   * DejaGnu	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     DejaGnu is a framework for testing other programs that provides a single
     front end for all tests.  The flexibility and consistency of the DejaGnu
     framework make it easy to write tests for any program.  DejaGnu comes
     with `expect' and Tcl.

   * Diffutils	   (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU `diff' compares files showing line-by-line changes in several
     flexible formats.	It is much faster than traditional Unix versions.
     The Diffutils distribution contains `diff', `diff3', `sdiff', and `cmp'.

   * DJGPP     (BinCD, DjgppD)

     DJ Delorie has ported GCC/G++ 2.5.7 to the i386 MS-DOS platform.  The
     DJGPP package also contains a 32-bit 80386 DOS extender with symbolic
     debugger; development libraries; and ports of Bison, `flex', GAS, and
     the GNU binary utilities.	Full source code is provided.

     DJGPP supports SVGA (up to 1024x768), XMS & VDISK memory allocation,
     `himem.sys', VCPI (e.g. QEMM, DESQview, & 386MAX), and DPMI (e.g.
     Windows 3.x, OS/2, QEMM, & QDPMI).

     It is available via FTP from `ftp.clarkson.edu' in `/pub/msdos/djgpp'.
     You can subscribe to a mailing list on DJGPP by sending your e-mail
     address to `djgpp-request@sun.soe.clarkson.edu'.  In addition, the FSF
     distributes it on floppy disks and on the Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM.

     See the description for GCC in this section for more information.

   * `dld'     (LangT, SrcCD)

     `dld' is a dynamic linker written by W. Wilson Ho.	 Linking your program
     with the `dld' library allows you to dynamically load object files into
     the running binary.  Currently supported are VAX (Ultrix), Sun 3 (SunOS
     3.4 and 4.0), SPARC (SunOS 4.0), Sequent Symmetry (Dynix), and Atari ST.

   * `doschk'	  (UtilT, SrcCD)

     This program is intended as a utility to help software developers ensure
     that their source file names are distinguishable on System V platforms
     with 14-character filenames and on MS-DOS with 11 character filenames.

   * `ecc'     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `ecc' is a Reed-Solomon error correction checking program, which can
     correct three byte errors in a block of 255 bytes and detect more severe
     errors.

   * Elib     (EmcsT, SrcCD)

     This is a small library of Emacs Lisp functions, including routines for
     using AVL trees and doubly-linked lists.

   * `elvis'	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `elvis' is a clone of the `vi'/`ex' Unix editor.  It supports nearly all
     of the `vi'/`ex' commands in both visual and line mode.  `elvis' runs
     under BSD, System V, Xenix, Minix, MS-DOS & Atari TOS, and should be
     easy to port to many other systems.

   * GNU Emacs 18     (DemcsD, EmcsT, SrcCD, VMSEmcsT)

     In 1975, Richard Stallman developed the first Emacs, an extensible,
     customizable real-time display editor.  GNU Emacs is his second
     implementation.  It offers true Lisp--smoothly integrated into the
     editor--for writing extensions, and provides an interface to MIT's X
     Window System.  In addition to its powerful native command set,
     extensions which emulate other popular editors are distributed: vi, EDT
     (DEC's VMS editor) and Gosling (aka Unipress) Emacs.  It has many other
     features which make it a full computing support environment.  It is
     described by the `GNU Emacs Manual', the `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference
     Manual' and a reference card.  Source for all three come with the
     software.

     GNU Emacs 18.59 runs on many Unix systems (in hardware order): Alliant
     FX/80 & FX/2800, Altos 3068, Amdahl (UTS), Apollo, AT&T (3Bs & 7300 PC),
     DG Aviion, Bull DPX/2 (2nn & 3nn) CCI 5/32 & 6/32, Celerity, Convex,
     Digital (DECstation 3100 & 5000 (PMAXes), Mips, VAX (BSD, SysV & VMS)),
     Motorola Delta 147 & 187 Dual, Elxsi 6400, Encore (DPC, APC & XPC),
     Gould, HP (9000 series 200, 300, 700 & 800, but not 500), HLH Orion
     (original & 1/05), IBM (RS/6000 (AIX), RT/PC (4.2 & AIX) & PS/2 (AIX (386
     only))), ISI (Optimum V, 80386), Intel 860 & 80386 (BSD, Esix, SVR3,
     SVR4, SCO, ISC, IX, AIX & others (see "MS-DOS Distribution")), Iris
     (2500, 2500 Turbo & 4D), Masscomp, MIPS, National Semiconductor 32000,
     NeXT (Mach), NCR Tower 32 (SVR2 & SVR3), Nixdorf Targon 31, Nu (TI &
     LMI), pfa50, Plexus, Prime EXL, Pyramid (original & MIPS), Sequent
     (Balance & Symmetry), SONY News (m68k & MIPS), Stride (system release 2),
     all Suns including 386i (all SunOS & some Solaris vers.), Tadpole, Tahoe,
     Tandem Integrity S2, Tektronix (16000 & 4300), Triton 88, Ustation E30
     (SS5E), Whitechapel (MG1) & Wicat.

     In operating system order: AIX (RS/6000, RT/PC, 386-PS/2), BSD (vers.
     4.1, 4.2, 4.3), DomainOS, Esix (386), HP-UX (HP 9000 series 200, 300,
     700, 800 but not 500), ISC (386), IX (386), Mach, Microport, NewsOS
     (Sony m68k & MIPS) SCO (386), SVR0 (Vax, AT&T 3Bs), SVR2, SVR3, SVR4,
     Solaris 2.0, SunOS, UTS (Amdahl), Ultrix (vers. 3.0, 4,1), Uniplus 5.2
     (Dual machines), VMS (vers. 4.0, 4.2, 4.4, 5.5) & Xenix (386).

   * GNU Emacs 19     (EmcsT, SrcCD)

     Unlike some other recent derivations of Emacs, GNU Emacs 19 continues to
     work on character-only terminals as well as under the X Window System.
     New features in Emacs 19 include: multiple X windows ("frames" to
     Emacs), with a separate X window for the minibuffer or with a minibuffer
     attached to each X window; property lists associated with regions of
     text in a buffer; multiple fonts and colors defined by those properties;
     simplified and improved processing of function keys, mouse clicks and
     mouse movement; X selection processing, including clipboard selections;
     hooks to be run if point or mouse moves outside a certain range; menu
     bars and popup menus defined by keymaps; scrollbars; before and after
     change hooks; source-level debugging of Emacs Lisp programs; European
     character sets support; floating point numbers; improved buffer
     allocation, using a new mechanism capable of returning storage to the
     system when a buffer is killed; interfacing with the X resource manager;
     GNU configuration scheme support; good RCS support; & many updated
     libraries.

     GNU Emacs 19.22 is known to work on (in hardware order): Bull DPX/2 2nn
     & 3nn (SVR3) & sps7 (SVR2); Clipper; Cubix QBx (SysV); DEC MIPS (Ultrix
     4.2 & OSF/1, not VMS); Motorola Delta 147 & 187 (SVR3, SVR4, & m88kbcs);
     Elxsi 6400 (SysV); Gould Power Node & NP1 (BSD 4.2 & 4.3); Honeywell
     XPS100 (SysV); HP9000 series 200, 300, 700, 800 (BSD 4.3 or HP-UX 7, 8,
     9); i386 & i486 (386BSD, AIX, BSDI/386, FreeBSD, Esix, ISC, Linux,
     NetBSD, SCO3.2v4 with ODT, SysV, Xenix); RS6000 (AIX 3.2); RT/PC (AIX or
     BSD); Iris 4D (Irix 4.x & 5.x); National Semiconductor 32K (Genix); NeXT
     (BSD or Mach 2 w/ NeXTStep 3.0); Prime EXL (SysV); Pyramid (BSD);
     Sequent Symmetry (BSD); Sun 3 & 4, SPARC 1, 1+, 2, 10 & Classic (SunOS
     4.0, 4.1, Solaris 2); Tadpole 68k (SysV); Tektronix XD88 (SVR3) & 4300
     (BSD); & Titan P2 & P3 (SysV).

     In operating system order: AIX (i386, RS6000, RT/PC); BSD 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
     (i386, Gould Power Node & NP1, HP9000 series 300, NeXT, Pyramid,
     Symmetry, Tektronix 4300, RT/PC); Esix (i386); Genix (ns32k); HP-UX 7,
     8, 9 (HP 9000 series 200, 300, 700, 800, but not 500); Irix 4 & 5 (Iris
     4D); ISC (i386); Linux (i386); NetBSD (i386, HP9000 series 300); Mach 2
     & 3 (i386, NeXT); SCO 3.2v4 (i386); SVR2 (Bull sps7); SVR3 (Bull DPX/2
     2nn & 3nn, Motorola Delta 147 & 187, Tektronix XD88); SVR4 (Motorola
     Delta 147 & 187); Solaris 2 (SPARC 1, 1+, 2, 10, Classic); SunOS 4.0,
     4.1 (Sun 3 & 4, SPARC 1, 1+, 2, 10 & Classic); Ultrix 4.2 (DEC MIPS); &
     Xenix (i386).

     Other configurations supported by Emacs 18 should work with few changes;
     as users tell us more about their experiences with different systems, we
     will augment the list.

   * `es'     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     This is an extensible shell based on `rc' that has first class
     functions, lexical scope, an exception system, and rich return values
     (i.e. functions can return values other than just numbers).  Like `rc',
     it is great for both interactive use and for scripting, particularly
     because its quoting rules are much less baroque than the C or Bourne
     shells.

   * `expect'	  (LangT, SrcCD)

     `expect' runs scripts to conduct dialogs with programs.  It is
     distributed along with Tcl and DejaGnu.

   * `f2c'     (LangT, SrcCD)

     `f2c' converts Fortran-77 source files into C or C++, which can then be
     compiled with GCC.

   * Fax     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Fax is the freely-available MIT AI Lab fax spooling system, which
     provides Group 3 fax transmission and reception services for a networked
     Unix system.  It requires a faxmodem which conforms to the new EIA-592
     Asynchronous Facsimile DCE Control Standard, Service Class 2.

   * Fileutils	   (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     Fileutils work on files: `chgrp', `chmod', `chown', `cp', `dd', `df',
     `dir', `du', `install', `ln', `ls', `mkdir', `mkfifo', `mknod', `mv',
     `mvdir', `rm', `rmdir', `touch', & `vdir'.	 Only some of these are on
     the Selected Utilities diskettes.

   * `find'	(UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     `find' is frequently used both interactively and in shell scripts to
     find files which match certain criteria and perform arbitrary operations
     on them.  `xargs' and `locate' are also included.

   * `finger'	  (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU Finger, which serves as a direct replacement for existing finger
     programs, solves this problem.  For sites with many hosts, a single host
     may be designated as the finger "server" host.  This host collects
     information about who is logged in to other hosts at that site.  If a
     user at site A wants to know about users logged on at site B, a single
     query to any machine at the site will return complete information.

   * `flex'	(LangT, UtilD, SrcCD)

     `flex' is a mostly-compatible replacement for the `lex' scanner
     generator, written by Vern Paxson of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.
     `flex' generates far more efficient scanners than `lex' does.  Sources
     for the `Flex Manual' and reference card are included.

   * Fontutils	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     The Fontutils can create fonts for use with Ghostscript or TeX, starting
     with a scanned type image and converting the bitmaps to outlines.	They
     also contain general conversion programs and other utilities.

   * GAS     (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU assembler has been rewritten to use the BFD library.  Native
     assembly works for: Sun 3, 4, & SPARC (SunOS 4.1 or Solaris 2); i386
     (AIX, 386BSD, BSDI/386, Linux); m68k (BSD, HP-UX, Convergent
     Technologies SysV); MIPS (Ultrix, Irix); Hitachi H8/500; & VAX (BSD,
     Ultrix, VMS).

     Cross assembling can be done for: i386 (SCO, go32 MS-DOS/DJGPP);
     ebmon29k; Hitachi H8/300; i960 (COFF); MIPS ECOFF (Ultrix, Iris, MIPS
     Magnum); Nindy 960; vxworks (68k or 960); & Zilog Z8000.

   * GAWK     (LangT, SrcCD)

     GAWK is upwardly compatible with the System V Release 4 version of
     `awk'.  Texinfo source for the `GAWK Manual' comes with the software.

   * GCC     (BinCD, DjgppD, LangT, SrcCD)

     Version 2 of the GNU C compiler supports three languages: C, C++ and
     Objective C; the source file name suffix or a compiler option selects
     the language.  The front end support for Objective C was donated by NeXT.
     The runtime support needed to run Objective C programs is now distributed
     with GCC (this does not include any Objective C classes aside from
     `object').	 As much as possible, G++ is kept compatible with the
     evolving draft ANSI standard, but not with `cfront' (AT&T's compiler),
     which has been diverging from ANSI.

     The GNU C compiler is a fairly portable optimizing compiler which
     performs automatic register allocation, common sub-expression
     elimination, invariant code motion from loops, induction variable
     optimizations, constant propagation and copy propagation, delayed
     popping of function call arguments, tail recursion elimination,
     integration of inline functions and frame pointer elimination,
     instruction scheduling, loop unrolling, filling of delay slots, leaf
     function optimization, optimized multiplication by constants, a certain
     amount of common subexpression elimination (CSE) between basic blocks
     (though not all of the supported machine descriptions provide for
     scheduling or delay slots), a feature for assigning attributes to
     instructions, and many local optimizations that are automatically
     deduced from the machine description.  Function-wide CSE has been
     written, but needs to be cleaned up before it can be installed.
     Position-independent code is supported on the 68k, i386, Hitachi Slt,
     Hitachi H8/300, Clipper, 88k, SPARC & SPARClite.

     GCC can open-code most arithmetic on 64-bit values (type `long long
     int').  It supports extended floating point (type `long double') on the
     68k; other machines will follow.

     GCC supports full ANSI C, traditional C and GNU C extensions.  GNU C has
     been extended to support nested functions, nonlocal gotos, and taking the
     address of a label.

     GCC can generate a.out, COFF, ELF & OSF-Rose files when used with a
     suitable assembler.  It can produce debugging information in these
     formats: BSD stabs, COFF, ECOFF, ECOFF with stabs, & DWARF.

     GCC generates code for: a29k, Alpha, ARM, Convex cN, Clipper, Elxsi,
     H8300, HP-PA (1.0 and 1.1) i370, i386, i486, i860, i960, m68k, m68020,
     m88k, MIPS, ns32k, Pyramid, ROMP, RS6000, SH, SPARC, SPARClite, VAX, and
     we32k.

     Operating systems supported include: AIX, ACIS, AOS, BSD, Clix, Ctix,
     DG/UX, Dynix, Genix, HP-UX, ISC, Irix, Linux, Luna, LynxOS, Mach, Minix,
     NeWSOS, OSF, OSF-Rose, RISCOS, SCO, Solaris 2, SunOS 4, SysV, Ultrix,
     Unos, & VMS.

     The old (version 1) machine descriptions for the Alliant, Tahoe and Spur
     (as well as a new port for the Tron) do not work, but are still included
     in the distribution in case someone wants to work on them.

     Using the configuration scheme for GCC, building a cross-compiler is as
     easy as building a compiler for the same target machine.  Version 2
     supports more general calling conventions: it can pass arguments "by
     reference" and can preallocate the space for stack arguments.  GCC 2 on
     the SPARC uses the SPARC conventions for structure arguments and return
     values.

     Source for the GCC manual, `Using and Porting GNU CC', is included with
     the compiler.  The manual describes how to run and install the GNU C
     compiler, and how to port it to new systems.  It describes new features
     and incompatibilities of the compiler, but people not familiar with C
     will also need a good reference on the C programming language.


   * GDB     (BinCD, LangT, SrcCD)

     In GDB, object files and symbol tables are now read via the BFD library,
     which allows a single copy of GDB to debug programs of multiple object
     file formats such as a.out and COFF.  Other new features include command
     language improvements, remote debugging over serial lines or TCP/IP, and
     watchpoints (breakpoints triggered when the value of an expression
     changes).	Exception handling, SunOS shared libraries and C++ multiple
     inheritance are only supported when used with GCC version 2.

     Both X and GNU Emacs user interfaces to GDB are available, in addition to
     its command line interpreter.

     GDB uses a standard remote interface to a simulator library which (so
     far) contains simulators for the Zilog Z8001/2, the Hitachi H8/300,
     H8/500 & Super-H.

     GDB can perform cross-debugging.  To say that GDB *targets* a platform
     means that it can perform native or cross-debugging for it.  To say that
     GDB can *host* a given platform means that it can be built on it, but
     cannot necessarily debug native programs.	GDB can:

	* *target* & *host*: DEC Alpha (OSF/1), Amiga 3000 (Amix), DECstation
	  3100 & 5000 (Ultrix), HP 9000/300 (BSD), IBM RS/6000 (AIX), i386
	  (BSD, SCO, Linux, LynxOS), Motorola Delta m88k (System V), NCR 3000
	  (SVR4), SGI Iris (MIPS running Irix V3 & V4), SONY News (NewsOS
	  3.x), Sun-3 & SPARC (SunOS 4.1, Solaris 2.0) & Ultracomputer (29K
	  running Sym1).

	* *target*, but not *host*: i960 Nindy, AMD 29000 (COFF & a.out),
	  Fujitsu SPARClite, Hitachi H8/300, m68k & m68332.

	* *host*, but not *target*: Intel 386 (Mach), IBM RT/PC (AIX) &
	  HP/Apollo 68k (BSD).

     In addition, GDB can use the symbol tables emitted by the compilers
     supplied by most vendors of MIPS-based machines, including DEC.  (These
     symbol tables are in a format which almost nobody else uses.)  Source for
     the manual `Debugging with GDB' and a reference card are included.

   * `gdbm'	(LangT, UtilD, SrcCD)

     The `gdbm' library is the GNU replacement for the traditional `dbm' and
     `ndbm' libraries.	It implements a database using quick lookup by
     hashing.  `gdbm' does not need sparse file formats (unlike its Unix
     counterparts).

   * Ghostscript     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Ghostscript is GNU's graphics language which is almost fully compatible
     with Postscript.

   * Ghostview	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Ghostview provides an X11 user interface for the Ghostscript interpreter.
     Ghostview and Ghostscript function as two cooperating programs; Ghostview
     creates a viewing window and Ghostscript draws in it.  There is a port
     for Ghostview to MS-Windows.

   * `gmp'     (LangT, SrcCD)

     GNU MP is a library for arbitrary precision arithmetic on signed integers
     and rational numbers.  It has a rich set of functions with a regular
     interface.

   * GNATS     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Gnats (GNats: A Tracking System) is a bug-tracking system.	 It is based
     upon the paradigm of a central site or organization which receives
     problem reports and negotiates their resolution by electronic mail.
     Although it's been used primarily as a software bug-tracking system so
     far, it is sufficiently generalized so that it could be used for
     handling system administration issues, project management or any number
     of other applications.

   * `gnuplot'	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `gnuplot' is an interactive program for plotting mathematical
     expressions and data.  It handles both curves (2 dimensions) and surfaces
     (3 dimensions).  Curiously, the program was neither written nor named for
     the GNU Project; the name is a coincidence.

   * GnuGo     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GnuGo plays the game of Go (Wei-Chi); it is not yet very sophisticated.

   * `gperf'	 (LangT, SrcCD)

     `gperf' is a "perfect" hash-table generation utility.  There are
     actually two implementations of `gperf', one written in C and one in
     C++.  Both will produce hash functions in either C or C++.

   * GNU Graphics     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU Graphics is a set of programs which produce plots from ASCII or
     binary data.  It supports output to Tektronix 4010, Postscript, and the
     X Window System or compatible devices.  Features include support for
     output in ln03 and TekniCAD TDA file formats; a replacement for the
     `spline' program; examples of shell scripts using `graph' and `plot'; a
     statistics toolkit; and the use of `configure' for installation.

     Existing ports need retesting.  Contact Rich Murphey, `Rich@rice.edu',
     if you can help test/port it to anything beyond a SPARCstation.

   * `grep'/`egrep'/`fgrep'	(UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     The `[ef]grep' programs are GNU's versions of the Unix programs of the
     same name.	 They are much faster than the traditional Unix versions.

   * `groff' and `mgm'	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `groff' is a document formatting system, which includes implementations
     of `troff', `pic', `eqn', `tbl', `refer', the `man', `ms' and `mm'
     macros, as well as drivers for Postscript, TeX dvi format, and
     typewriter-like devices.  Also included is a modified version of the
     Berkeley `me' macros and an enhanced version of the X11 `xditview'
     previewer.

     `mgm' is a macro package for `groff'.  It is almost compatible with the
     DWB `mm' macros and has several extensions.

   * `gzip'	(DjgppD, EmcsT, LangT, SrcCD, UtilT)

     Some of the contents of our tape and FTP distributions are compressed.
     We have software on our tapes and FTP sites to uncompress these files.
     Due to patent troubles with `compress', we have switched to another
     compression program, `gzip'.  `gzip' can expand LZW-compressed files but
     uses a different algorithm for compression which generally produces
     better results.  It also uncompresses files compressed with System V's
     `pack' program.

   * `hello'	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     The GNU `hello' program produces a familiar, friendly greeting.  It
     allows non-programmers to use a classic computer science tool which would
     otherwise be unavailable to them.	Because it is protected by the GNU
     General Public License, users are free to share and change it.

     Like any truly useful program, `hello' provides a built-in mail reader.

   * `hp2xx'	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU hp2xx reads HP-GL files, decomposes all drawing commands into
     elementary vectors, and converts them into a variety of vector and raster
     output formats.  It is also an HP-GL previewer.  Currently supported
     vector formats include encapsulated Postscript, Uniplex RGIP, Metafont
     and various special TeX-related formats, and simplified HP-GL (line
     drawing only) for imports.	 Raster formats supported include IMG, PBM,
     PCX, & HP-PCL (including Deskjet & DJ5xxC support).  Previewers work
     under X11 (Unix), OS/2 (PM & full screen), MS-DOS (SVGA, VGA, & HGC).

   * `indent'	  (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU `indent' is a modified version of the freely-redistributable BSD
     program of the same name.	It formats C source according to GNU coding
     standards by default, though the BSD default and other formats are
     available as options.

   * `ispell'	  (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Ispell is an interactive spell checker that suggests "near misses" as
     replacements for unrecognized words.  System and user-maintained
     dictionaries can be used.	Standalone and GNU Emacs interfaces are
     available.

   * JACAL     *Not available from the FSF*

     JACAL is a symbolic mathematics system for the simplification and
     manipulation of equations and single and multiple-valued algebraic
     expressions constructed of numbers, variables, radicals, and algebraic
     functions, differential operators and holonomic functions.	 In addition,
     vectors and matrices of the above objects are included.

     JACAL was written in Scheme by Aubrey Jaffer.  It comes with an IEEE
     P1178 and R4RS compliant version of Scheme ("SCM") written in C.  SCM
     runs on Amiga, Atari-ST, MS-DOS, NOS/VE, VMS, Unix and similar systems.
     SLIB is a portable Scheme library used by JACAL.  Get JACAL, SLIB, and
     SCM sources via anonymous FTP from either `nexus.yorku.ca' in
     `/pub/scheme/new', `altdorf.ai.mit.edu' in `/archive/scm' or
     `prep.ai.mit.edu' in `/pub/gnu/jacal'.

     The FSF is not distributing JACAL on any media.  To receive an IBM PC
     floppy disk with the source and executable files, send $99.00 to:

	     Aubrey Jaffer
	     84 Pleasant Street
	     Wakefield, MA   01880
	     USA

   * `less'	(UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     `less' is a display paginator similar to `more' and `pg' but with
     various features (such as the ability to scroll backwards) that most
     pagers lack.

   * libg++	(BinCD, LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU C++ library is an extensive collection of C++ `forest' classes,
     a new IOStream library for input/output routines, and support tools for
     use with G++.  Among the classes supported are Obstacks,
     multiple-precision Integers and Rationals, Complex numbers, arbitrary
     length Strings, BitSets, and BitStrings.  There is also a set of
     pseudo-generic prototype files available for generating common container
     classes.  Partial documentation in Texinfo format is included (not yet
     published on paper).

   * `m4'     (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU `m4' is an implementation of the traditional Unix macro processor.
     It is mostly SVR4 compatible, although it has some extensions (for
     example, handling more than 9 positional parameters to macros).  `m4'
     also has built-in functions for including files, running shell commands,
     doing arithmetic, etc.

   * `make'	(BinCD, EmcsT, LangT, UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU `make' supports POSIX 1003.2 and has all but a few obscure features
     of the BSD and System V versions of `make', as well as many of our own
     extensions.  GNU extensions include long options, parallel compilation,
     conditional execution and functions for text manipulation.	 Texinfo
     source for the `Make Manual' comes with the program.

     GNU `make' is on several of our tapes because some native `make'
     programs lack the `VPATH' feature essential for using the GNU configure
     system to its full extent.	 A shell script is included to build GNU
     `make' on such systems.

   * MandelSpawn     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     A parallel Mandelbrot generation program for the MIT X Window System.

   * mtools	(UtilT, SrcCD)

     mtools is a set of public domain programs to allow Unix systems to read,
     write and manipulate files on an MS-DOS file system (usually a diskette).

   * MULE     (SrcCD)

     MULE is a MULtilingual Enhancement to GNU Emacs 18.  It can handle many
     character sets at once including Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese,
     Thai, Greek, the ISO Latin-1 through Latin-5 character sets, Ukrainian,
     Russian, and other Cyrillic alphabets.  A text buffer in MULE can
     contain a mixture of characters from these languages.  To input any of
     these characters, you can use various input methods provided by MULE
     itself.  In addition, if you use MULE under some terminal emulator
     (kterm, cxterm, or exterm), you can use its input methods.

   * NetHack	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     NetHack is a display-oriented adventure game similar to Rogue.  Both
     ASCII and X displays are supported.

   * NIH Class Library	   (LangT, SrcCD)

     The NIH Class Library (formerly known as "OOPS", Object-Oriented Program
     Support) is a portable collection of G++ classes, similar to those in
     Smalltalk-80, which has been developed by Keith Gorlen of the National
     Institutes of Health (NIH), using the C++ programming language.

   * Octave	(LangT)

     Octave is a high-level language, primarily intended for numerical
     computations.  It provides a convenient command line interface for
     solving linear and nonlinear problems numerically.

     Octave can do arithmetic for real and complex scalars and matrices, solve
     sets of nonlinear algebraic equations, integrate functions over finite
     and infinite intervals, and integrate systems of ordinary differential
     and differential-algebraic equations.

     Octave is available via anonymous ftp from `ftp.che.utexas.edu' in the
     directory `/pub/octave'.  The files are in gzipped tar format (see the
     file `README' on `prep.ai.mit.edu:/pub/gnu').

     The Octave distribution includes a 150+ page Texinfo manual.

   * Oleo     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Oleo is a spreadsheet program (better for you than the more expensive
     spreadsheets).  It supports the X Window System and character-based
     terminals, and can output Embedded Postscript renditions of spreadsheets.
     Keybindings should be familiar to Emacs users and are configurable.
     Under X and in Postscript output, Oleo supports multiple, variable width
     fonts.

   * `p2c'     (LangT, SrcCD)

     `p2c' is a Pascal-to-C translator written by Dave Gillespie.  It is
     intended primarily for use on 32-bit machines, though porting it to
     convert code to work on 16-bit machines may be possible.

   * `patch'	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `patch' is our version of Larry Wall's program to take `diff's output
     and apply those differences to an original file to generate the modified
     version.

   * PCL     (EmcsT, SrcCD)

     PCL is a free implementation of a large subset of CLOS, the Common Lisp
     Object System.  PCL was written by Xerox Corporation.

   * `perl'	(LangT, SrcCD)

     Larry Wall's `perl' combines the features and capabilities of `sed',
     `awk', `sh' and C, as well as interfaces to all the system calls and
     many C library routines.  Perl Mode for editing `perl' code comes with
     GNU Emacs 19.

   * `ptx'     (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     `ptx' is the GNU version of `ptx', a permuted index generator.  Among
     other things, it produces readable "KWIC" (KeyWords In Context) indexes
     without the need of `nroff'.  There is an option to output TeX code.

   * `rc'     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `rc' is a shell that features a C-like syntax (much more so than `csh')
     and far cleaner quoting rules than the C or Bourne shells.	 It's
     intended to be used interactively, but is also great for writing
     scripts.  It inspired the shell `es'.

   * RCS     (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     The Revision Control System, RCS, is used for version control and
     management of software projects.  When used with GNU `diff', RCS can
     handle binary files (executables, object files, 8-bit data, etc).	Also
     see the entry for "CVS".

   * `recode'	  (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `recode' converts files between character sets and usages.	 When exact
     transliterations are not possible, it may get rid of the offending
     characters or fall back on approximations.	 This program recognizes or
     produces nearly 150 different character sets and is able to transliterate
     files between almost any pair.  Most RFC 1345 character sets are
     supported.

   * regex     (LangT, SrcCD)

     The GNU regular expression library supports POSIX.2, except for
     internationalization features.  In the past, it has been included in many
     GNU programs which use regex routines.  Now it is finally available
     separately.

   * Scheme	   (SchmT, SrcCD)

     For information about Scheme, see "Contents of the Scheme Tape".  The
     version on the Source Code CD-ROM only works under MS-DOS.

   * `screen'	  (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `screen' is a terminal multiplexor that runs several separate "screens"
     (ttys) on a single physical terminal.  Each virtual terminal emulates a
     DEC VT100 plus several ANSI X3.64 and ISO 2022 functions.	`screen'
     sessions can be detached and resumed later on a different terminal.

   * `sed'     (UtilD, UtilT, SrcCD)

     `sed' is a stream-oriented version of `ed'.  It is used copiously in
     shell scripts.  GNU sed comes with the rx library, which is a faster
     version of regex.

   * Shellutils	    (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Shellutils are used interactively or in shell scripts: `basename',
     `date', `dirname', `echo', `env', `expr', `false', `groups', `id',
     `nice', `nohup', `printenv', `printf', `sleep', `stty', `su', `tee',
     `test', `true', `tty', `uname', `who', `whoami', & `yes'.

   * GNU Shogi	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Shogi is a Japanese game similar to Chess; a major difference is that
     captured pieces can be returned into play.

     GNU Shogi has been created by modifying GNU Chess; GNU Shogi implements
     the same features as GNU Chess and uses similar heuristics.  As a new
     feature, sequences of partial board patterns can be introduced in order
     to help the program play a good order of moves towards specific opening
     patterns.	There is both a text and X display interface.

     GNU Shogi is primarily supported by Matthias Mutz on behalf of FSF.

	     Matthias Mutz
	     Universitaet Passau, FMI
	     94030 Passau
	     Germany
	     E-mail: `mutz@kirk.fmi.uni-passau.de'

   * Smalltalk	   (LangT, SrcCD)

     GNU Smalltalk is an interpreted object-oriented programming language
     system written in portable C.  Features include an incremental garbage
     collector, a binary image save capability, the ability to invoke
     user-written C code and pass parameters to it, a GNU Emacs editing mode,
     optional byte-code compilation tracing and byte-code execution tracing,
     and automatically loaded per-user initialization files.

   * superopt	  (LangT, SrcCD)

     Superopt is a function sequence generator that uses an exhaustive
     generate-and-test approach to find the shortest instruction sequence for
     a given function.	You provide the GNU superoptimizer a function, a CPU
     to generate code for, and how many instructions you can accept.  Its
     application in GCC is described in the `ACM SIGPLAN PLDI'92'
     proceedings.  Superopt supports: SPARC, m68k, m68020, m88k, IBM RS/6000,
     AMD 29000, Intel 80x86, Pyramid, DEC Alpha, & HP-PA.

   * `tar'     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     GNU `tar' includes multivolume support, the ability to archive sparse
     files, automatic archive compression/decompression, remote archives and
     special features that allow `tar' to be used for incremental and full
     backups.  Unfortunately GNU `tar' implements an early draft of the POSIX
     1003.1 `ustar' standard which is different from the final standard.
     Adding support for the new changes in a backward-compatible fashion is
     not trivial.

   * Termcap Library	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     The GNU Termcap library is a drop-in replacement for `libtermcap.a' on
     any system.  It does not place an arbitrary limit on the size of Termcap
     entries, unlike most other Termcap libraries.  Included is source for the
     `Termcap Manual' in Texinfo format.

   * TeX     *Not available from the FSF*

     TeX is document formatting system that handles complicated typesetting,
     including mathematics.  It is the standard formatter for the GNU system.

     We do not distribute TeX because you can get it from the University of
     Washington, who serve as the center for maintenance of the Unix version
     of TeX.

     To order a full distribution written in `tar' on either a 1/4-inch
     4-track QIC-24 cartridge or a 4mm DAT cartridge, send $210.00 to:

	     Northwest Computing Support Center
	     DR-10, Thomson Hall 35
	     University of Washington
	     Seattle, WA   98195
	     E-mail: `unixtex@u.washington.edu'
	     Phone: (206) 543-6259

     Please make checks payable to the University of Washington.  Checks must
     be in U.S. Dollars, drawn on a U.S. bank.	Prepaid orders are preferred
     but purchase orders are acceptable; however, purchase orders carry an
     extra charge of $10.00 to pay for invoice processing.  Overseas sites:
     please add to the base cost $20.00 for shipment via air parcel post, or
     $30.00 for shipment via courier.  Please check with the above for
     current prices and formats.

   * Texinfo	 (EmcsT, LangT, SrcCD, UtilD, UtilT)

     Texinfo is a set of utilities which generate printed manuals and online
     hypertext-style documentation (called "Info"), and provide means for
     reading the online versions.  Version 3 contains both GNU Emacs Lisp and
     standalone C programs, as well as source for the `Texinfo Manual'.

   * Textutils	   (UtilT, SrcCD)

     The Textutils programs manipulate textual data: `cat', `cksum', `comm',
     `csplit', `cut', `expand', `fold', `head', `join', `nl', `od', `paste',
     `pr', `sort', `split', `sum', `tac', `tail', `tr', `unexpand', `uniq', &
     `wc'.

   * Tcl     (LangT, SrcCD)

     Tcl is an embeddable tool command language.  `expect' and DejaGnu work
     with and use Tcl.

   * Tile Forth	    (LangT, SrcCD)

     Tile Forth is a 32-bit implementation of the Forth-83 standard written in
     C, allowing it to be easily moved between different computers
     (traditionally, Forth implementations are written in assembler to use
     the underlying hardware as optimally as possible, but this also makes
     them less portable).

   * `time'	(UtilT, SrcCD)

     `time' is used to report statistics (usually from a shell) about the
     amount of user, system and real time used by a process.

   * `tput'	(UtilT, SrcCD)

     `tput' is a portable way to allow shell scripts to use special terminal
     capabilities.  GNU `tput' uses the Termcap database, rather than
     Terminfo as most implementations do.

   * UUCP     (UtilT, SrcCD)

     This version of UUCP was written by Ian Lance Taylor, and is the standard
     UUCP system for GNU.  It currently supports the `f', `g' (in all window
     and packet sizes), `G', `t' and `e' protocols, as well a Zmodem protocol
     and two new bidirectional protocols.  If you have a Berkeley sockets
     library, it can make TCP connections.  If you have TLI libraries, it can
     make TLI connections.

   * `uuencode'	    (UtilT, SrcCD)

     Uuencode and uudecode are used to transmit binary files over
     transmission mediums that do not support other than simple ASCII data.

   * `wdiff'	 (UtilT, SrcCD)

     `wdiff' compares two files, finding which words have been deleted or
     added to the first in order to obtain the second.	We hope eventually to
     integrate it, as well as some ideas from a similar program called
     `spiff', into future releases of GNU `diff'.



Contents of the Emacs Tape
--------------------------

This tape contains a Common Lisp implementation, GNU Emacs, assorted
extensions that work with GNU Emacs, and a few other important utilities.

   * Calc 2.02b

   * CLISP 1993.11.08

   * Elib 0.06

   * GNU Emacs 18.59

   * GNU Emacs 19.22

   * `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual', Edition 2.02.1

   * `gzip' 1.2.4

   * `make' 3.70

   * PCL 1993.03.18

   * Texinfo 3.1



Contents of the Languages Tape
------------------------------

This tape contains programming tools: compilers, interpreters, and related
programs (parsers, conversion programs, debuggers, etc.).

   * Binutils 2.3

   * Bison 1.22

   * C Library 1.06.7

   * DejaGnu 1.1.1

   * `dld' 3.2.3

   * `expect' 4.7.6

   * `ecc' 1.2.1

   * `f2c' 1993.04.28

   * `flex' 2.4.5

   * GAS 2.2

   * GAWK 2.15.3

   * GCC 2.5.7 (includes G++ & Objective C)

   * GDB 4.11

   * `gdbm' 1.7.1

   * `gmp' 1.3.2

   * `gperf' 2.1a

   * `gzip' 1.2.4

   * `indent' 1.8

   * libg++ 2.5.3

   * `make' 3.70

   * NIH Class Library 3.0

   * Octave 1.0

   * `p2c' 1.20

   * `perl' 4.036

   * regex 0.12

   * Smalltalk 1.1.1

   * Superopt 2.3

   * Tcl 6.7

   * Texinfo 3.1

   * Tile Forth 2.1



Contents of the Utilities Tape
------------------------------

This tape consists mostly of smaller utilities and miscellaneous applications
not available on the other GNU tapes.

   * `acm' 4.2

   * Autoconf 1.7

   * BASH 1.13.5

   * `bc' 1.02

   * Chess 4.0.pl62

   * `cpio' 2.3

   * CVS 1.3

   * `dc' 0.2

   * Diffutils 2.6

   * `doschk' 1.1

   * `elvis' 1.7

   * `es' 0.84

   * Fax 3.2.1

   * Fileutils 3.9

   * `find' 3.8

   * `finger' 1.37

   * Fontutils 0.6

   * Ghostscript 2.6.1

   * Ghostview 1.5

   * GNATS 3.2

   * `gnuplot' 3.5

   * GnuGo 1.1

   * Graphics 0.17

   * `grep'/`egrep'/`fgrep' 2.0

   * Groff 1.08

   * `gzip' 1.2.4

   * `hello' 1.3

   * `hp2xx' 3.1.4

   * `ispell' 4.0

   * `less' 177

   * `m4' 1.1

   * `make' 3.70

   * MandelSpawn 0.07

   * mtools 2.0.7

   * NetHack 3.1.3

   * Oleo 1.5

   * `patch' 2.1

   * `ptx' 0.3

   * `rc' 1.4

   * RCS 5.6.0.1

   * `recode' 3.3

   * `screen' 3.5.2

   * `sed' 2.03

   * Shellutils 1.9.2

   * Shogi 1.1.pl02

   * `tar' 1.11.2

   * Termcap 1.2

   * Texinfo 3.1

   * Textutils 1.9

   * `time' 1.6

   * `tput' 1.0

   * UUCP 1.04

   * `uuencode' 1.0

   * `wdiff' 0.4



Contents of the Scheme Tape
---------------------------

Scheme is a simplified, lexically-scoped dialect of Lisp.  It was designed at
MIT and other universities to teach students the art of programming, and to
research new parallel programming constructs and compilation techniques.

This tape contains MIT Scheme 7.1, which conforms to the "Revised^4 Report On
the Algorithmic Language Scheme" (MIT AI Lab Memo 848b), for which TeX source
is included.  It is written partly in C, but is presently hard to bootstrap.
Binaries which can be used to bootstrap Scheme are available for the
following systems:

   * HP 9000 series 300, 400, 700 & 800 running HP-UX 7.0 or 8.0

   * NeXT running NeXT OS 1.0 or 2.0

   * Sun-3 or Sun-4 running SunOS 4.1

   * DECstation 3100/5100 running Ultrix 4.0

   * Sony NWS-3250 running NEWS OS 5.01

   * Vax running 4.3 BSD

If your system is not on this list and you don't enjoy the bootstrap
challenge, see the "JACAL" entry in the "GNU Software Available Now."



Contents of the X11 Tapes
-------------------------

The two X11 tapes contain Version 11, Release 5 of the MIT X Window System.
The first FSF tape contains all of the core software, documentation and some
contributed clients.  We call this the "required" X tape since it is
necessary for running X or running GNU Emacs under X.  The second,
"optional", FSF tape contains contributed libraries and other toolkits, the
Andrew User Interface System, games, and other programs.

The X11 Required tape also contains all fixes and patches released to date.
We update this tape as new fixes and patches are released.



Berkeley Networking 2 Tape
--------------------------

The Berkeley "Net2" release contains the second 4.3 BSD distribution and is
newer than both 4.3 BSD-Tahoe and 4.3 BSD-Reno.	 It includes most of the BSD
software system except for a few utilities, some parts of the kernel and some
library routines which your own C library is likely to provide (we have
replacements on other tapes for many of the missing programs).	This release
also contains third party software including Kerberos and some GNU software.



VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes
--------------------------------

We offer two VMS tapes.	 One has just the GNU Emacs editor ( none of the other
software on the Emacs Tape, described above, is included).  The other has the
GNU C compiler, Bison (to compile GCC), GAS (to assemble GCC's output) and
some library and include files (none of the other software on the Languages
Tape, described above, is included.).  We are not aware of a GDB port for VMS.
Both VMS tapes have executables from which you can bootstrap, as the DEC VMS C
compiler cannot compile GCC.  Please do not ask us to devote effort to VMS
support, because it is peripheral to the GNU Project.



Source Code CD-ROM
******************

The Free Software Foundation has produced its third source CD-ROM.  It
contains the following:

   * `acm' 3.1

   * Autoconf 1.7

   * BASH 1.13.4

   * `bc' 1.02

   * Binutils 1.9 & 2.3

   * Bison 1.22

   * GNU C Library 1.06.7

   * Calc 2.02b

   * GNU Chess 4.0p62

   * CLISP 1993.11.08

   * `cperf' 2.1a

   * `cpio' 2.3

   * CVS 1.3

   * `dc' 0.2

   * DejaGnu 1.0.1

   * diffutils 2.6

   * `dld' 3.2.3

   * `doschk' 1.1

   * `ecc' 1.2.1

   * elib 0.06

   * `elvis' 1.7

   * Emacs 18.59 & Emacs 19.21

   * `es' 0.84

   * `f2c' 1993.04.28

   * Fax 3.2.1

   * Fileutils 3.9

   * `find' 3.8

   * `finger' 1.37

   * `flex' 2.3.8

   * Fontutils 0.6

   * GAS 1.36.utah, 1.38.1, & 2.2

   * Gawk 2.15.3

   * GCC 2.5.4

   * GDB 4.11

   * `gdbm' 1.7.1

   * Ghostscript 2.6.1

   * Ghostview 1.5

   * Ghostview for Windows 1.0

   * `gmp' 1.3.2

   * GNATS 3.01

   * `gnuplot' 3.5

   * GnuGo 1.1

   * Graphics 0.17

   * `grep'/`egrep'/`fgrep' 2.0

   * Groff 1.08

   * `gzip' 1.2.4

   * `hello' 1.3

   * `hp2xx' 3.1.3a

   * `indent' 1.8

   * `ispell' 4.0

   * `less' 177

   * `libg++' 2.5.1

   * `m4' 1.1

   * `make' 3.69.1

   * MandelSpawn 0.06

   * mtools 2.0.7

   * MULE 1.0

   * Nethack 3.1.3

   * NIHCL 3.0

   * Oleo 1.5

   * `p2c' 1.20

   * `patch' 2.1

   * PCL 1993.03.18

   * `perl' 4.036

   * `ptx' 0.3

   * `rc' 1.4

   * RCS 5.6.0.1

   * `recode' 3.2.4

   * regex 0.12

   * MIT Scheme (MS-DOS) 7.2

   * `screen' 3.5.2

   * `sed' 1.18 & 2.03

   * Shellutils 1.9.1

   * GNU Shogi 1.1p02

   * Smalltalk 1.1.1

   * Superopt 2.3

   * `tar' 1.11.2

   * Termcap library 1.2

   * Texinfo 3.1

   * Textutils 1.9.1

   * Tile Forth 2.1

   * `time' 1.6

   * `tput' 1.0

   * UUCP 1.04

   * `uuencode' 1.0

   * `wdiff' 0.04

   * X11R5

The CD-ROM also contains Texinfo source for the `GNU Emacs Lisp Reference
Manual' Edition 2.02 for version 19 and a snapshot of the Emacs Lisp Archive
at Ohio State University.  (You can get libraries in this archive by UUCP
(ask `staff@cis.ohio-state.edu' for directions) or by anonymous FTP from
`archive.cis.ohio-state.edu' in `/pub/gnu/emacs/elisp-archive'.)

The contents of the MIT Scheme, VMS, and Net2 tapes are not included

The CD-ROM is in ISO 9660 format and can be mounted as a read-only file
system on most operating systems.  If your driver supports it you can mount
the CD-ROM with "Rock Ridge" extensions and it will look just like an
ordinary Unix file system, rather than one full of truncated and otherwise
mangled names that fit the vanilla ISO 9660 specifications.

You can build most of this software without needing to copy the sources off
the CD.	 Only sufficient disk space for object files and intermediate build
targets is required.  Except for the MIT Scheme binaries for MS-DOS and the
Ghostview for Windows executable, there are no precompiled programs on this
CD.  You will need a C compiler (programs which need some other interpreter
or compiler normally provide the C source for a bootstrapping program).

If a business is ultimately paying, the CD costs $400.	It costs $100 if you,
an individual, are paying out of your own pocket.

   * What do the individual and company prices mean?

     The software on our disk is free; anyone can copy it and anyone can run
     it.  What we charge for is the physical disk and the service of
     distribution.

     We charge two different prices depending on who is buying.	 When a
     company or other organization buys the disk, we charge $400.  When an
     individual buys the same disk, we charge just $100.

     This distinction is not a matter of who is allowed to use the software.
     In either case, once you have a copy, you can distribute as many copies
     as you wish, and there's no restriction on who can have or run them.
     The price distinction is entirely a matter of what kind of entity pays
     for the CD.

     You, the reader, are certainly an individual, not a company.  If you are
     buying a disk "in person", then you are probably doing so as an
     individual.  But if you expect to be reimbursed by your employer, then
     the disk is really for the company, so please pay the company price and
     get reimbursed for the company price.  We won't try to check up on
     you--we use the honor system--so please cooperate.

     Buying CDs at the company price is especially helpful for the GNU
     project; just 80 CDs at the company price will support an FSF programmer
     or tech writer for a year.

   * Why is there an individual price?

     In the past, our distribution tapes have been ordered mainly by
     companies.	 The CD at the price of $400 provides them with all of our
     software for a much lower price than they would previously have paid for
     six different tapes.  To lower the price more would cut into the FSF's
     funds very badly.

     However, for individuals, $400 is too high a price; hardly anyone could
     afford that.  So we decided to make CDs available to individuals at the
     lower price of $100, but not do the same for companies.

   * Is there a maximum price?

     Our stated prices are minimums.  Feel free to pay a higher price if you
     wish to support GNU development more.  The sky's the limit; we will
     accept as high a price as you can offer.  Or simply give a
     tax-deductible donation to the Free Software Foundation, which is a
     tax-exempt public charity.



Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM
******************************

We are now offering a CD-ROM that contains executables for GNU compiler tools
for some systems which lack a compiler.	 This will allow users of those
systems to compile GNU and other free software without having to buy a
proprietary compiler.

The CD-ROM is in ISO 9660 format and can be mounted as a read-only file
system on most operating systems.  If your driver supports it you can mount
the CD-ROM with "Rock Ridge" extensions and it will look just like an
ordinary Unix file system, rather than one full of truncated and otherwise
mangled names that fit the vanilla ISO 9660 specifications.

We hope to have more systems included with each update of this CD-ROM.	If
you can help build binaries for new systems (especially for systems that
don't come with a C compiler), or have a system to suggest, please contact us
at either address on the front cover.

These programs:

   * DJGPP 1.11.m1

   * GCC/G++/Objective C 2.5.7

   * GDB 4.11

   * GAS 2.2

   * Binutils 2.3

   * Bison 1.22

   * Flex 2.4.5

   * Make 3.70

   * libg++ 2.5.3

For these platforms:

   * `i386-msdos'

   * `hppa1.1-hp-hpux9'

   * `sparc-sun-solaris2'

   * `sparc-sun-sunos4.1'



Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service
**********************************

If you do not have net access, our subscription service enables you to stay
current with the latest FSF developments.  For a one-time cost equivalent to
three tapes or CD-ROMs, we will mail you four new versions of the tape of
your choice or the Source Code CD-ROM.	The tapes are sent each quarter, the
Source Code CD-ROMs are sent as they are issued.  (The Source Code CD-ROM is
currently issued twice a year, but we may issue it more frequently in the
future.)

Regularly, we will send you a new version of an Emacs, Languages, Utilities,
or MIT X Window System Required tape or the Source CD-ROM.  The BSD Net-2,
MIT Scheme, and MIT X Window System Optional tapes are not changed often
enough to warrant quarterly updates.  The Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM is
so new we do not yet know if we will be offering subscriptions to it.

Since Emacs 19 is now on the Emacs Tape and the Source CD-ROM, a subscription
to either will be a convenient way to keep current with Emacs 19 updates as
it moves through beta-test.

A subscription is also an easy way to keep up with the regular bug fixes to
the MIT X Window System.  We update the X11 Required tape, as fixes and
patches for the X Window System are issued throughout the year.	 Each new
edition of the Source CD-ROM also has updated sources for the X Window System.
See sections "Tape Subscriptions" and "CD-ROM Subscriptions" on the "Free
Software Foundation Order Form".



The Deluxe Distribution
***********************

The Free Software Foundation has been repeatedly asked to create a package
that provides executables for all of our software.  Usually we offer only
sources.  In addition to providing binaries with the source code, the Deluxe
Distribution includes copies of all our printed manuals and reference cards.

The FSF Deluxe Distribution contains the binaries and sources to hundreds of
different programs including GNU Emacs, the GNU C Compiler, the GNU Debugger,
the complete MIT X Window System, and all the GNU utilities.

You may choose one of these machines and operating systems: HP 9000 series
300, 700 or 800 (4.3 BSD or HP-UX); RS/6000 (AIX); SONY News 68k (4.3 BSD or
NewsOS 4); Sun-3, Sun-4, or SPARC (SunOS 4 or Solaris).	 If your machine or
system is not listed, or if a specific program has not been ported to that
machine, please call the FSF office at the phone number below or send e-mail
to `gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu'.

We supply the software on one of these media in Unix tar format: 1600 or 6250
bpi, 1/2 inch, reel to reel tape; Sun DC300XLP 1/4 inch cartridge, QIC-24; HP
16 track DC600HC 1/4 inch cartridge; IBM RS/6000 1/4 inch cartridge, QIC-150;
Exabyte 8mm cartridge; DAT 4mm cartridge.  If your computer cannot read any
of these, please call us.

The manuals included are one each of the Bison, Calc, Gawk, GNU C Compiler,
GNU C Library, GNU Debugger, Flex, GNU Emacs Lisp Reference, Make, Texinfo &
Termcap manuals; six copies of the manual for GNU Emacs; & a packet of
reference cards each for GNU Emacs, Calc, the GNU Debugger, Bison, & Flex.

In addition, every Deluxe Distribution includes CD-ROMs (in ISO 9660 format
with Rock Ridge extensions) that contains sources of our software & compiler
tool binaries for some systems.

The Deluxe Distribution costs $5000.  It is for people who want to get
everything compiled for them or who want to make a purchase that helps the
FSF in a large way.  To order, please fill out the "Deluxe Distribution"
sections in the "Free Software Foundation Order Form" and send it to:

	Free Software Foundation, Inc.
	675 Massachusetts Avenue
	Cambridge, MA	02139-3309
	USA
	Electronic mail: gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu
	Phone: +1-617-876-3296
	FAX: +1-617-492-9057
	FAX (in Japan):
	  0031-13-2473 (KDD)
	  0066-3382-0158 (IDC)



MS-DOS Distribution
*******************

The FSF distributes, on 3.5 inch 1.44MB diskettes, some of the GNU software
ported to MS-DOS.  The disks have both sources and executables.



Contents of the Demacs diskettes
--------------------------------

Demacs is a version of GNU Emacs 18.55 ported to MS-DOS, with some changes
from Emacs 18.57.  Two versions are actually included: one which handles
8-bit character sets; and one based on an early version of MULE which handles
16-bit character sets including Kanji.	We distribute them on five diskettes.

Demacs runs on Intel 80386 and 80486-based machines running MS-DOS.  It is
compatible with XMS memory managers and VCPI, but not yet with Microsoft
Windows extended mode or other DPMI managers.



Contents of the DJGPP diskettes
-------------------------------

We distribute DJGPP on 22 diskettes.  DJGPP requires at least 5MB of hard
disk space to install, and 512K of RAM to use.	See `GNU Software Available
Now" for more information on DJGPP.



Contents of the Selected Utilities diskettes
--------------------------------------------

The GNUish MS-DOS Project releases GNU software ported to PC compatibles.  In
general, this software will run on 8086 and 80286-based machines; an 80386 is
not required.  Some of these utilities are necessarily missing features.
Included are: `cpio', `diff', some file utilities, `find', `flex', `gdbm',
`grep', `indent', `less', `m4', `make', MAWK, MicroEmacs, `ptx', RCS, `sed',
`shar', `sort', & Texinfo.



Contents of the Windows diskette
--------------------------------

We are distributing versions of GNU Chess and `gnuplot' ported to Microsoft
Windows on a single diskette.



FSF T-shirt
***********

We still have our Free Software Foundation T-shirts available, designed by
Cambridge artist Jamal Hannah.	The front of the t-shirt has an image of a
GNU hacking at a workstation with the text "GNU's Not Unix" above and the
text "Free Software Foundation" below.	They are available in two colors,
Natural and Black.  Natural is an off-white, unbleached, undyed,
environment-friendly cotton, printed with black ink, and is great for
tye-dyeing or displaying as is.	 Black is printed with white ink and is
perfect for late night hacking.	 All shirts are thick 100% cotton, and are
available in sizes M, L, XL and XXL.

The front of the t-shirt has an image of a GNU hacking at a workstation with
the text "GNU's Not Unix" above and the text "Free Software Foundation" below.
We have just added a copy of the GNU General Public License to the back of
the t-shirt, which use to be blank.

Use the "Free Software Foundation Order Form" to order your shirt, and
consider getting one as a present for your favorite hacker!



Free Software Foundation Order Form
***********************************

All items are distributed with permission to copy and to redistribute.
Texinfo source for each manual is on the appropriate tape, diskette, or
CD-ROM; the prices for these magnetic media do not include printed
documentation.	All items are provided on an "as is" basis, with no warranty
of any kind.  Please allow six weeks for delivery (though it won't usually
take that long).


      PRICE AND CONTENTS MAY CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE AFTER June 30, 1994.


The following tapes in the formats indicated (see sub-section for each tape in
"GNU Software Available Now" for contents):

	Please circle the dollar amount for each tape you order.

  *** NEW !!! ***	*** 4mm DAT tapes ***

		Reel to	 Sun (1)    HP	      IBM (2)	Exabyte	 DAT
		reel			      RS/6000		  NEW!!
		Unix tar  Unix tar  Unix tar  Unix tar	Unix tar Unix tar
		9-track	  QIC-24    16-track  QIC-150
		1600 bpi  DC300XLP  DC600HC   DC600A
		1/2" reel 1/4" c.t. 1/4" c.t. 1/4" c.t. 8mm c.t. 4mm c.t.
	(c.t. = cartridge tape)
	(n/a = not available)
Emacs		$200	  $210	    $230      $215 (3)	$205	 $225
Languages	$200	  $210	    $230       n/a	$205	 $225
Utilities	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225
BSD-Net2	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225
Scheme		$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225
X11r5-Required	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225
X11r5-Optional	$200	  $210	    $230      $215	$205	 $225

	 (1) Sun tapes can be read on some other Unix systems.
	 (2) IBM RS/6000 tapes can be read on some other Unix systems.
	 (3) The IBM Emacs tape also has binaries for GNU Emacs.


Subscriptions, 4 updates for one year (see "Tape & CD-ROM Subscription
Service"):

Emacs		$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675
Languages	$600	  $630	    $690       n/a	$615	 $675
Utilities	$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675
X11r5-Required	$600	  $630	    $690      $645	$615	 $675

      Subtotal $ ______	 Please put total of the above circled amounts here.


The following, on 1600 bpi reel-to-reel 9 track 1/2" tapes, in VMS BACKUP
format (aka interchange format) (see "VMS Emacs and VMS Compiler Tapes"):

____ @ $195  = $ ______	  VMS Emacs, GNU Emacs source & executables only.

____ @ $195  = $ ______	  VMS Compiler, GCC, GAS, and Bison source and
			  executables only.


FSF Deluxe Distribution (see "The Deluxe Distribution" and end of order form):

____ @ $5000 = $ ______	 The Deluxe Distribution, with manuals, and
			 executables.


Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM, in ISO 9660 format (see "Compiler Tools
Binaries CD-ROM"):

  *** NEW !!! ***

____ @ $240  = $ ______	  GNU Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM for
			  corporations and other organizations.	 NEW!!
____ @	$60  = $ ______	  GNU Compiler Tools Binaries CD-ROM for individuals.
			  NEW!!



Source Code CD-ROM, in ISO 9660 format (see "Source Code CD-ROM"):

____ @ $400  = $ ______	  GNU Source Code CD-ROM for corporations and
			  other organizations.
____ @ $100  = $ ______	  GNU Source Code CD-ROM for individuals.


Subscriptions, next 4 updates, of the Source Code CD-ROM, in ISO 9660 format
(see "Tape & CD-ROM Subscription Service"):

  *** NEW !!! ***

____ @ $1200 = $ ______	  Subscription to the GNU Source Code CD-ROM for
			  corporations and other organizations.	 NEW!!
____ @ $300  = $ ______	  Subscription to the GNU Source Code CD-ROM for
			  individuals.	NEW!!


The following source and executables for MS-DOS, on 3.5" 1.44MB diskettes
(see "MS-DOS Distribution"):

____ @ $ 90  = $ ______	  Demacs diskettes, GNU Emacs, for 80386 and up.

____ @ $ 80  = $ ______	  DJGPP diskettes, GCC version 2, for 80386 and up.

____ @ $ 85  = $ ______	  Selected Utilities diskettes, 8086 and up.

____ @ $ 40  = $ ______	  Windows diskette, GNU Chess and gnuplot for
			  Microsoft Windows.


The following manuals, 7 by 9.25 inches, soft cover with an illustration,
offset printed, "lay-flat" binding (see "GNU Documentation"):

____ @ $ 25  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 18 manual, unit price for 1 to 5
			  copies, about 410 pages, with a reference card.
____ @ $ 17  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 18 manuals, unit price for 6 or
			  more.
____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Lisp Reference version 18 manual, about
			  614 pages in 2 volumes.
____ @ $200  = $ ______	  A box of 5 GNU Emacs Lisp Reference version 18
			  manuals.

  *** NEW !!! ***
____ @ $ 25  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 19 manual, unit price for 1 to 5
			  copies, about 418 pages, new 9th edition with a
			  reference card.  NEW!!
____ @ $ 17  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 19 manuals, unit price for 6 or
			  more.
____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Lisp Reference version 19 manual, about
			  756 pages in 2 volumes.
____ @ $200  = $ ______	  A box of 5 GNU Emacs Lisp Reference version 19
			  manuals.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Debugging with GDB, about 182 pages, with a reference
			  card.
____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Texinfo manual, about 248 pages.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Gawk manual, about 188 pages.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Make manual, about 158 pages.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Bison manual, about 98 pages, with a reference card.

____ @ $ 20  = $ ______	  Flex manual, about 124 pages, with a reference card.



The following manuals, 7 by 9.25 inches, soft cover, photocopied, GBC binding:

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  Using and Porting GNU CC version 2.3, about 428
			  pages.
____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU C Library Reference Manual, about 670 pages.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Termcap manual, 68 pages.



The following manual, 8.5 by 11 inches, soft cover, photocopied, GBC binding:

____ @ $ 50  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Calc manual, about 596 pages, with a
			  reference card.


The following reference cards, unit price, without the manuals:

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 18 reference card.

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 19 reference card.

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Calc reference card.

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  GDB reference card.

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  Bison reference card.

____ @ $  2  = $ ______	  Flex reference card.



The following reference cards, in packets of ten:

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 18 reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs version 19 reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GNU Emacs Calc reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  GDB reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  Bison reference cards.

____ @ $ 10  = $ ______	  Flex reference cards.



GNU/FSF T-shirts, thick 100% cotton (see "FSF T-shirts"):

  *** NEW !!! ***

The back of the t-shirt, which used to be blank, now has a copy of the GNU
General Public License on it.  NEW!!

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size M     ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size L     ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size XL    ____ natural  ____ black.

____ @ $ 15  = $ ______	  Size XXL   ____ natural  ____ black.
		 ------

      Subtotal $ ______

	     + $ ______	  In  Massachusetts:  add 5% sales tax, or give tax
			  exempt number.
	     + $ ______	  In Alaska, Hawaii, or Puerto Rico for shipping:
			  for GNU Emacs Lisp Reference and GNU Emacs Calc
			  manuals, add $5 each, or $20 per box.	 For all other
			  items, add $5 base charge, then $1 per item except
			  reference cards; i.e.,
			  shipping for all other items = $5 + $1 * n.
	     + $ ______	  Outside of U.S., Canada, and Puerto Rico for
			  shipping:  Add $20 base charge, and then add $10
			  more for *each* item (except reference cards) in the
			  order; i.e.,
			  shipping for all other items = $20 + $10 * n.
	     + $ ______	  Optional (tax-deductible in the U.S.) donation.
		 ------

	 TOTAL $ ______	  We pay for shipping via UPS ground transportation in
			  the contiguous 48 states and Canada.



Please answer the following questions:

  How did you hear about the GNU Project? ____________________________________

  ____________________________________________________________________________

  ____________________________________________________________________________

  Do you also have network access to GNU software?    Yes ______     No ______



If you are ordering a CD-ROM, please answer the following questions:

  Is this a replacement for a previous edition of the GNU Source Code CD-ROM?

	Yes ______  No ______

  If FSF offered a less expensive CD-ROM, which had only GNU Emacs on it, but
  also included binaries for several platforms, would you purchase it: (check
  one)
	______ instead of the Source Code CD-ROM?

	______ in addition to the Source Code CD-ROM?

	______ Would not purchase it.



Orders filled only upon receipt of check, money order or credit card order in
U.S. dollars.  We do not have the staff to handle the billing of unpaid
orders.	 Please help keep our lives simple by including your payment with your
order.


Please make checks payable to the "Free Software Foundation".


Name: ________________________________________________________________________

Mail Stop/Dept. Name: ________________________________________________________

Organization: ________________________________________________________________

Street Address: ______________________________________________________________

City/State/Province: _________________________________________________________

Zip Code/Postal Code/Country: ________________________________________________

Telephone number in case of a problem with your order.
For international orders, please include a FAX numbers. ______________________


For orders from outside the U.S.:

Orders must be paid in U.S. dollars.  You are responsible for paying all
duties, tariffs, and taxes.  If you refuse to pay the charges, the shipper
will return or abandon the order.


For Deluxe Distributions:

Machine: _____________________________________________________________________

Operating system: ____________________________________________________________

Media type: __________________________________________________________________



For Credit Card Orders:

FSF takes these credit cards: Visa, Mastercard, JCB, Diner's Club, and Carte
Blanche.  Please note that we are charged about 5% of an order's total amount
in credit card processing fees.	 Please consider paying by check instead, or
adding on a 5% donation to make up the difference.  To place a credit card
order, please give us this information:

Card type: ___________________________________________________________________

Account Number: ______________________________________________________________

Expiration Date: _____________________________________________________________

Your Signature: ______________________________________________________________



			 Please mail orders to: Free Software Foundation
						675 Massachusetts Avenue
Version: Jan 1994 ASCII etc/ORDERS		Cambridge, MA  02139  USA
						+1 617 876 3296
						FAX: +1 617 492 9057
						FAX numbers in Japan:
PRICES AND CONTENTS MAY CHANGE				0031-13-2473 (KDD)
WITHOUT NOTICE AFTER June 30, 1994.			0066-3382-0158 (IDC)

---------------------------------------------------------------------
local variables:
mode: text
fill-column: 78
end:
